<a id="ref-sec-the-stieltjes-integral" class="course-anchor"></a>
# The Stieltjes integral

> Part: Random Variables and Probability

The Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral is a type of integral specially useful
in probability theory, because of the resemblance between the Stieltjes
measures and probability measures. To introduce the concept consider
a real valued random variable that takes values on a closed interval
$\left[a,b\right]$, this is for example the result of coin toss when
catalogued as $0$ or $1$, the underlying probability space is formed
by $S=\left\{ H,T\right\} $, $\mathcal{A}=\left\{ \emptyset,S,\left\{ H\right\} ,\left\{ T\right\} \right\} $
and a probability measure on $\mathcal{A}$, a function $\mu:\mathcal{A}\to\left[0,1\right]$
such that $\mu\left(\left\{ H\right\} \right),\mu\left(\left\{ T\right\} \right)\geq0$,
$\mu\left(S\right)=\mu\left(\left\{ H\right\} \right)+\mu\left(\left\{ T\right\} \right)=1$
and $\mu\left(\emptyset\right)=0$. The random variable is then a
function $f:S\to\mathbb{R}$ such that $f\left(H\right)=0$ and $f\left(T\right)=1$.
It seems natural to ask what is the probability that $f\left(s\right)=1$,
it is of course given by $\mu\left(T\right)$, in the same way can
ask for the probability that $f\left(s\right)\leq c$ for any value
$c$, the function that answers that question is called the cumulative
distribution function. In this example we have:
\[
F\left(c\right)=\Pr\left(f\left(s\right)\leq c\right)=\begin{cases}
0 &   if  c<0\\
\mu\left(H\right) &   if  0\leq c<1\\
1 &   if  1\leq c
\end{cases}
\]
Because the measure $\mu$ is non-negative it is clear that $F$ has
to be a non-decreasing function, it is also continuous from the left,
moreover it is possible to recover $\mu$ from knowledge of $F$:
\[
\mu\left(H\right)=F\left(0\right)\qquad\mu\left(T\right)=1-F\left(0\right)
\]

The Stieltjes measure is a general way of looking at this last step.
It treats the problem of inducing a measure from a non-decreasing
right continuous function. The application to probability theory is
apparent because we deal with the CDF of a random variable, and not
directly with its probability measure, as we saw before it is this
latter object the one that defines the expected value.

Now we turn to define formally the Stieltjes integral. Let $F:\left[a,b\right]\to\mathbb{R}$
be a non-decreasing and right-continuous function. Let $\mathcal{A}$
be an algebra of all subintervals of $\left[\alpha,\beta\right)$
(including open, closed and half-open intervals). Define a measure
on $\mathcal{A}$ by:
\begin{eqnarray*}
m\left(\alpha,\beta\right) & = & F\left(\beta\right)-F\left(\alpha+0\right)\\
m\left[\alpha,\beta\right] & = & F\left(\beta+0\right)-F\left(\alpha\right)\\
m\left(\alpha,\beta\right] & = & F\left(\beta+0\right)-F\left(\alpha+0\right)\\
m\left[\alpha,\beta\right) & = & F\left(\beta\right)-F\left(\alpha\right)
\end{eqnarray*}
where $F\left(x+0\right)=\lim_{\epsilon\to0;\epsilon>0}F\left(x+\epsilon\right)$
is the right limit of $F$ at $x$.

Now consider the Lebesgue extension of $m$, call it $\mu_{F}$ and
the $\sigma$-algebra of all $\mu_{F}$-measurable, call it $\mathcal{A}_{F}$.
This set  contains all subintervals of $\left[\alpha,\beta\right)$
and hence all the Borel sets of $\left[\alpha,\beta\right)$.
!!! info "Definition 25.1: Stieltjes measure"

    The measure $\mu_{F}$ described above
    is called the (Lebesgue-)Stieltjes measure and $F$ its generating
    function.

This concept is easily extended to the whole real line. Some examples
show the generality of this type of measure:
!!! example "Example 25.1"

    Let $F\left(x\right)=x$, then the Stieltjes measure is nothing but
    the Lebesgue measure on the real line, that is, the extension of the
    concept of length of an interval.

!!! example "Example 25.2"

    Let $F$ be a jump function with discontinuity points $\left\{ x_{1},x_{2},\ldots\right\} $
    and corresponding jumps $\left\{ h_{1},h_{2},\ldots\right\} $. The
    measure is of course:
    \[
    m\left(\left\{ x_{n}\right\} \right)=h_{n}\qquad m\left(\left\{ x_{1},x_{2},\ldots\right\} ^{c}\right)=0
    \]
    
    Then every subset of $\left[\alpha,\beta\right)$ is $\mu_{F}$-measurable
    because their measure depends only on countable points. Any set $A$
    has measure given by:
    \[
    \mu_{F}\left(A\right)=\sum_{x_{n}\in A}h_{n}
    \]
    This number exists by assumption. A Stieltjes measure generated by
    a jump function is called a discrete measure. All discrete random
    variables have CDF that are jump functions.

!!! example "Example 25.3"

    Let $F$ be an absolutely continuous non-decreasing function on $\left[\alpha,\beta\right)$.
    Absolutely continuous functions have a finite derivative a.e. let
    this derivative be $f=F^{\prime}$. Then the Stieltjes measure $\mu_{F}$
    is defined for all Lebesgue measurable sets and:
    \[
    \mu_{F}\left(A\right)=\int_{A}f\left(x\right)dx
    \]
    clearly in this case $\mu_{F}\left(\left\{ x\right\} \right)=0$ because
    $\left\{ x\right\} $ has Lebesgue measure $0$.
    
    The result follows from Lebesgue theorem:
    
    \begin{thm}[Lebesgue]
    If $F$ is absolutely continuous on $\left[a,b\right]$
    then the derivative $F^{\prime}$ is integrable on $\left[a,b\right]$
    and:
    \[
    F\left(\beta\right)-F\left(\alpha\right)=\int_{\alpha}^{\beta}F^{\prime}\left(x\right)dx
    \]
    \end{thm}
    \begin{proof}
    [Kolmogorov and Fomin (2012, Sec. 33, Thm. 6)](https://books.google.com/books?id=cbbCAgAAQBAJ).
    \end{proof}
    Applying this theorem here we get:
    \[
    m\left(\alpha,\beta\right)=m\left[\alpha,\beta\right]=m\left(\alpha,\beta\right]=m\left[\alpha,\beta\right)=\int_{\alpha}^{\beta}f\left(x\right)dx
    \]
    Because $f$ is non-negative and integrable wrt all Lebesgue-measurable
    subsets of $\left[a,b\right]$ $\left(\mathcal{B}_{\left[a,b\right]}\right)$
    we know by proposition ([Proposition 24.3](section-24-the-lebesgue-integral.md#ref-prop-000020inducing-000020a-000020measure))
    that
    \[
    \mu_{F}\left(A\right)=\int_{A}f\left(x\right)dx
    \]
    is a measure on $\left(\left[a,b\right],\mathcal{B}_{\left[a,b\right]}\right)$
    that coincides with $m$, because the extension is unique we get that
    $\mu_{F}$ is the Stieltjes measure we are looking for.
    
    This type of measure is called absolutely continuous and is related
    to continuous random variables.

Now we can define the integral with respect to a Stieltjes measure:
!!! info "Definition 25.2: Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral"

    Let $\mu_{F}$ be Stieltjes
    measure with generating function $F$, and let $g$ be a $\mu_{F}$-measurable
    function, then the integral is defined as:
    \[
    \int_{a}^{b}g\left(x\right)dF\left(x\right)=\int_{\left[a,b\right]}g\left(x\right)d\mu_{F}
    \]
    If $\mu_{F}$ is discrete with $F\left(x\right)=\underset{x_{n}\leq x}{\sum}h\left(x_{n}\right)$,
    then we have:
    \[
    \int_{a}^{b}g\left(x\right)dF\left(x\right)=\sum_{n}g\left(x_{n}\right)h_{n}
    \]
    If $\mu_{F}$ is absolutely continuous then:
    \[
    \int_{a}^{b}g\left(x\right)dF\left(x\right)=\int_{a}^{b}g\left(x\right)f\left(x\right)dx
    \]

As hinted above in probability Stieltjes measures arise naturally.
Let $\xi$ be a random variable and define $F\left(x\right)=\Pr\left(\xi<x\right)$,
then as noted above $F$ is non-decreasing and continuous from the
left, moreover $F\left(-\infty\right)=0$ and $F\left(\infty\right)=1$.
The Lebesgue-Stieltjes measure allows us to define the expected value
and variance of the random variable as:
\[
E\left[\xi\right]=\int_{-\infty}^{\infty}xdF\left(x\right)\qquad V\left[\xi\right]=\int_{-\infty}^{\infty}\left(x-E\left[\xi\right]\right)^{2}dF\left(x\right).
\]
These definitions are valid for discrete and continuous random variables.

This part of the course develops the mathematical tools necessary
to study how random variables affect optimization problems. We start
with an overview of the most relevant stochastic processes that we
will encounter in the applications to come. The most important result
is Ito's Lemma, which defines the way in which we can take derivatives
of functions that depend on diffusions. Then we can apply Ito's Lemma
to problems of dynamic optimization, with special attention to stopping
time problems. Finally we apply it to the characterization of the
distribution of a random variable. This is done by means of the Kolmogorov
forward equation.

All these sections follow closely [Dixit and Pindyck (1994)](http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt7sncv), with
some portions adapted from [Stokey (2009)](http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt7sfgq).
