<a id="ref-part-random-variables-and-probability" class="course-anchor"></a>
<a id="ref-sec-measure" class="course-anchor"></a>
# Measure

> Part: Random Variables and Probability

## Measurable spaces ($\sigma$-algebras)

Before we define a measure recall that a measure has for domain a
collection of sets. For a measure to have some desirable properties
this collection of sets cannot be left unrestricted. It turns out
that the appropriate family of sets to be consider is that of $\sigma$-algebra.
!!! info "Definition: $\sigma$-algebra"

    Let $S$ be a set and ${\cal A}\subseteq2^{S}$
    a family of its subsets. ${\cal A}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra if and
    only if:
    
    
    1. $\emptyset,S\in{\cal A}$.
    1. $A\in{\cal A}$ implies $A^{c}=S\backslash A\in{\cal A}$. We say
    that ${\cal A}$ is closed under complement.
    1. $A_{n}\in{\cal A}$ for $n=1,\ldots$ implies $\cup A_{n}\in{\cal A}$.
    We say that ${\cal A}$ is closed under countable union.
    
    
      1. ${\cal A}$ is closed under countable intersection because $\mbox{\cap}A_{n}=\left(\cup A_{n}^{c}\right)^{c}$.
    
    
    If ${\cal A}$ is only closed under finite union (or intersection)
    then ${\cal A}$ is an algebra.

A $\sigma$-algebra imposes certain consistency to the family of sets
under consideration. The way to interpret it is that only subsets
of the $\sigma$-algebra can be known, hence measured. Because of
property (i) it is possible to know when none or all of the outcomes
occurred. Also if there is an outcome that occurred it must be possible
to determine if it didn't. Finally if it is possible to determine
that some outcomes occurred individually it can also be determined
if at least one or all of them were realized.

It is instructive to consider two simple examples of $\sigma$-algebras
that arise from throwing a 4 sided dice, then $S=\left\{ 1,2,3,4\right\} $.
One (trivial) $\sigma$-algebra is:
\[
{\cal A}=\left\{ \emptyset,S\right\}
\]
Another one is the $\sigma$-algebra generated by the collection $\left\{ \left\{ 1\right\} ,\left\{ 2\right\} ,\left\{ 3\right\} ,\left\{ 4\right\} \right\} $,
then:
\[
{\cal A}=\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
\left\{ 1\right\} ,\left\{ 2\right\} ,\left\{ 3\right\} ,\left\{ 4\right\} ,\left\{ 2,3,4\right\} ,\left\{ 1,3,4\right\} ,\left\{ 1,2,4\right\} ,\left\{ 1,2,3\right\} ,\\
\left\{ 1,2\right\} ,\left\{ 2,3\right\} ,\left\{ 3,4\right\} ,\left\{ 1,3\right\} ,\left\{ 1,4\right\} ,\left\{ 2,4\right\} ,\emptyset,S
\end{array}\right\}
\]
In this case ${\cal A}=2^{S}$, but this is not necessarily true,
imagine that one can only determine if an even number was thrown,
then the outcomes are $\left\{ \left\{ 1,3\right\} ,\left\{ 2,4\right\} \right\} $,
the $\sigma$-algebra is:
\[
{\cal A}=\left\{ \left\{ 1,3\right\} ,\left\{ 2,4\right\} ,\emptyset,S\right\}
\]

When $S$ has uncountably many elements this process cannot be exemplified
as easily but one can always define the $\sigma$-algebra generated
by a subset ${\cal A}\subseteq2^{S}$ as the intersection of all $\sigma$-algebras
that contain ${\cal A}$. Clearly the arbitrary intersection of $\sigma$-algebras
is again a $\sigma$-algebra.

Now that we have defined a $\sigma$-algebra its possible to say what
a measurable set and a measurable space are:
!!! info "Definition: Measurable Space"

    A pair $\left(S,{\cal A}\right)$ where
    $S$ is any set and ${\cal A}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra is called a
    measurable space. A set $A\in{\cal A}$ is called ${\cal A}$-measurable.

We say that $A\subseteq S$ is measurable with respect to a $\sigma$-algebra
${\cal A}$ if its elements are identifiable, that is, if the outcomes
represented in $A$ can be told apart from other outcomes given the
information in ${\cal A}$. For example the set $A=\left\{ 4\right\} $
is not measurable in the last example above, because its impossible
to know if a $4$ was the outcome of the throw.

A $\sigma$-algebra of special importance is the Borel $\sigma$-algebra.
!!! info "Definition: Borel $\sigma$-algebra"

    Let $S=\mathbb{R}$ and ${\cal A}$
    be the set of open and half open intervals. The Borel algebra, noted
    by ${\cal B}$, is the $\sigma$-algebra generated by ${\cal A}$.
    A set $B\in{\cal B}$ is called a Borel set.

The Borel algebra could have been defined equivalently with the closed
and half closed intervals (use complement). In general one can define
the Borel algebra for any metric space $\left(S,\rho\right)$ as the
smallest $\sigma$-algebra containing all the open balls. In the case
of the Euclidean spaces it can also be generated with open rectangles.

What follows is to define the measure of a measurable set.

## Measures

### Measures in $\sigma$-algebras

Given a measurable space $\left(S,{\cal A}\right)$ a measure is nothing
but a function $\mu:{\cal A}\to\overline{\mathbb{R}}$ with certain
restrictions that guarantee its consistency:
!!! info "Definition: Measure"

    Let $\left(S,{\cal A}\right)$ be a measurable
    space. A measure is an extended real-valued function $\mu:{\cal A}\to\overline{\mathbb{R}}$
    such that:
    
    
    1. $\mu\left(\emptyset\right)=0$
    1. $\mu\left(A\right)\geq0$ for all $A\in{\cal A}$.
    1. $\mu$ is countably additive. If $\left\{ A_{n}\right\} _{n=1}^{\infty}$
    is a countable, disjoint sequence in ${\cal A}$, then:
    \[
    \mu\left(\cup A_{n}\right)=\sum\mu\left(A_{n}\right)
    \]
    
    If furthermore $\mu\left(S\right)<\infty$ then $\mu$ is said to
    be a finite measure, and if $\mu\left(S\right)=1$ then $\mu$ is
    said to be a probability measure.

!!! info "Definition: Measure Space"

    A triple $\left(S,{\cal A},\mu\right)$ where
    $S$ is a set, ${\cal A}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra of its subsets and
    $\mu$ is a measure on ${\cal A}$ is called a measure space. The
    triple is called a probability space if $\mu$ is a probability measure.

An important concept is that of almost everywhere and almost surely.
These are qualifiers for a given proposition that can be evaluated
in sets of ${\cal A}$.
!!! info "Definition: Almost Everywhere and Almost Surely"

    Let $\left(S,{\cal A},\mu\right)$
    be a measure space. A proposition is said to hold almost everywhere
    (a.e.) or almost surely (a.s.) if there exists a set $A\in{\cal A}$
    such that $\mu\left(A\right)=0$ and the proposition holds in $A^{c}$.

An example of the use of a.e. or a.s. is when treating functions that
are similar to each other. One can say that two functions are equivalent
a.e. or that a function is continuous a.e. Then the functions $f$
and $g$ satisfy $f\left(x\right)=g\left(x\right)$ and $A=\left\{ x|f\left(x\right)\neq f\left(y\right)\right\} $
satisfies $\mu\left(A\right)=0$. In measure theory the behavior of
functions a.e. is all that matters, then we can treat functions that
have anomalies as long as those anomalies occur only in sets of measure
zero.

There are some properties of a measure that are useful to keep in
mind, a crucial one is used for Bayes law and the definition of conditional
probability.
!!! abstract "Proposition"

    Let $\left(S,{\cal A},\mu\right)$ be a measure space and $B\in{\cal A}$
    a set. Define $\lambda:{\cal A}\to\overline{\mathbb{R}}$ as $\lambda\left(A\right)=\mu\left(A\cap B\right)$.
    Then $\lambda$ is a measure on $\left(S,{\cal A}\right)$. If in
    addition $\mu\left(B\right)<\infty$ then $\tilde{\lambda}$ defined
    as $\tilde{\lambda}\left(A\right)=\nicefrac{\mu\left(A\cap B\right)}{\mu\left(B\right)}$
    is a probability measure on $\left(S,{\cal A}\right)$.

??? success "Proof"

    First, if $A,B\in{\cal A}$ then $A\cap B\in{\cal A}$, this follows
    from a $\sigma$-algebra being closed under countable intersection,
    by letting $A_{1}=A$ and $A_{n}=B$ for $n\geq2$ the result obtains.
    It is left to check the three properties of a measure:
    
    
    1. $\lambda\left(\emptyset\right)=\mu\left(\emptyset\cap B\right)=\mu\left(\emptyset\right)=0$.
    1. $\lambda\left(A\right)=\mu\left(A\cap B\right)\geq0$.
    1. Let $\left\{ A_{n}\right\} _{n=1}^{\infty}$ be a countable, disjoint
    sequence in ${\cal A}$, then the sequence $\left\{ A_{n}\cap B\right\} _{n=1}^{\infty}$
    is also disjoint and that:
    \[
    \lambda\left(\cup A_{n}\right)=\mu\left(\left(\cup A_{n}\right)\cap B\right)=\mu\left(\cup\left(A_{n}\cap B\right)\right)=\sum\mu\left(A_{n}\cap B\right)=\sum\lambda\left(A_{n}\right)
    \]
    1. If $\mu\left(B\right)<\infty$ then all the previous results hold
    for $\tilde{\lambda}$ by dividing everything by $\mu\left(B\right)$.
    Furthermore $\tilde{\lambda}\left(S\right)=\frac{\mu\left(S\cap B\right)}{\mu\left(B\right)}=\frac{\mu\left(B\right)}{\mu\left(B\right)}=1$.

Another useful property is given by the following proposition, it
reflects the intuitive property of measures being 'increasing':
!!! abstract "Proposition"

    Let $\left(S,{\cal A},\mu\right)$ be a measure space and $A,B\in{\cal A}$
    sets. If $A\subseteq B$ then $\mu\left(A\right)\leq\mu\left(B\right)$,
    if in addition $\mu$ is finite then $\mu\left(B\backslash A\right)=\mu\left(B\right)-\mu\left(A\right)$.

??? success "Proof"

    Because $A\subseteq B$, there exits $C=B\backslash A=B\cap A^{c}$
    such that $A\cup C=B$ and $A\cap C=\emptyset$. Then
    \[
    \mu\left(A\right)+\mu\left(C\right)=\mu\left(B\right).
    \]
    Moreover, $\mu\left(A\right)\leq\mu\left(B\right)$ because $\mu\left(C\right)\geq0$.
    If $\mu$ is finite then all elements above are well defined and:
    $\mu\left(B\backslash A\right)=\mu\left(B\right)-\mu\left(A\right)$.

The following property is widely used to establish properties of limits
of functions, and of the Lebesgue integral:
!!! abstract "Proposition"

    Let $\left(S,{\cal A},\mu\right)$ be a measure space:
    
    
    1. If $\left\{ A_{n}\right\} $ is an increasing sequence in ${\cal A}$,
    that is, if $A_{n}\subseteq A_{n+1}$ for all $n$, then:
    \[
    \mu\left(\cup A_{n}\right)=\lim\mu\left(A_{n}\right)
    \]
    1. If $\left\{ B_{n}\right\} $ is an decreasing sequence in ${\cal A}$,
    that is, if $B_{n}\supseteq B_{n+1}$ for all $n$, then:
    \[
    \mu\left(\cap B_{n}\right)=\lim\mu\left(B_{n}\right)
    \]

??? success "Proof"

    [Stokey et al. (1989, Sec. 7.2)](https://books.google.com/books?id=tWYo0QolyLAC). Satisfying these two properties makes a
    measure continuous.

### Measures in algebras and extensions [Optional]

So far we have defined a measure on an $\sigma$-algebra, but a $\sigma$-algebra
is usually a large collection of sets and defining a function on such
a set while preserving the consistency required for a measure is not
an easy task. An alternative is given by defining measures on algebras,
which are smaller and less complicated collections of sets. It can
be shown that these measures preserve all the desirable properties
of the more complicated spaces, and also allow for an extension to
$\sigma$-algebras, once the measure is properly constructed.

We start by defining a measure on an algebra.
!!! info "Definition: Measure"

    Let $\left(S,{\cal A}\right)$ be a measurable
    space. A measure is an extended real-valued function $\mu:{\cal A}\to\overline{\mathbb{R}}$
    such that:
    
    
    1. $\mu\left(\emptyset\right)=0$
    1. $\mu\left(A\right)\geq0$ for all $A\in{\cal A}$.
    1. If $\left\{ A_{n}\right\} _{n=1}^{\infty}$ is a countable, disjoint
    sequence in ${\cal A}$, and $\cup A_{n}\in{\cal A}$, then:
    \[
    \mu\left(\cup A_{n}\right)=\sum\mu\left(A_{n}\right)
    \]
    
    If furthermore $\mu\left(S\right)<\infty$ then $\mu$ is said to
    be a finite measure, and if $\mu\left(S\right)=1$ then $\mu$ is
    said to be a probability measure.
    
    Condition (iii) also includes finite union of disjoint sets as a special
    case.

!!! info "Definition: $\sigma$-finite measure"

    Let $S$ be a set, ${\cal A}$
    an algebra of its subsets and $\mu$ a measure defined on ${\cal A}$.
    If there is a countable sequence of sets in ${\cal A}$, $\left\{ A_{n}\right\} $,
    such that $\mu\left(A_{n}\right)<\infty$ and $S=\cup A_{n}$ then
    $\mu$ is $\sigma$-finite

It is now possible to extend the notion of this measure to a $\sigma$-algebra.
!!! abstract "Theorem"

    \textbf{\textup{(Caratheodory extension theorem) }}\textup{Let $S$
    be a set, ${\cal A}$ an algebra of its subsets and $\mu$ a measure
    defined on ${\cal A}$. Let ${\cal A}^{\star}$ be the smallest $\sigma$-algebra
    containing ${\cal A}$. There exists a measure $\mu^{\star}$ on ${\cal A}^{\star}$
    such that $\mu^{\star}\left(A\right)=\mu\left(A\right)$ for all $A\in{\cal A}$.}

The problem of uniqueness is also solved.
!!! abstract "Theorem"

    \textbf{\textup{(Hahn extension theorem) }}\textup{Let $S$ be a set,
    ${\cal A}$ an algebra of its subsets, $\mu$ a measure defined on
    ${\cal A}$ and ${\cal A}^{\star}$ the minimal $\sigma$-algebra
    of ${\cal A}$. If $\mu$ is $\sigma$-finite then the extension $\mu^{\star}$
    is unique. }

To see how these theorems and the extension of a measure are used
consider defining a measure on the Borel $\sigma$-algebra. It seems
logical to define the measure of an interval $A=\left(a,b\right)$
as $\mu\left(A\right)=b-a$ if $b\geq a$ and $\mu\left(A\right)=0$
otherwise (because the interval would be empty). Yet the Borel $\sigma$-algebra
contains sets beyond simple intervals, and the countable union of
intervals can give rise to weird sets. An answer to this problem is
given by defining a measure on the Borel algebra, formed by all types
of intervals and their finite unions. Defining a measure on this set
seems straightforward:

1. $\mu\left(\emptyset\right)=0$
1. $\mu\left(\left(a,b\right)\right)=\mu\left(\left[a,b\right]\right)=\mu\left(\left(a,b\right]\right)=\mu\left(\left[a,b\right)\right)=b-a$
1. $\mu\left(\left(-\infty,\infty\right)\right)=\mu\left(\left(-\infty,b\right]\right)=\mu\left(\left[a,\infty\right)\right)=\infty$
1. $\mu\left(\cup\left(a_{n},b_{n}\right)\right)=\sum\left(b_{n}-a_{n}\right)$
if the intervals are disjoint.

The function $\mu$ can be verified to be a measure on the Borel algebra,
and hence an extension to the Borel $\sigma$-algebra exists. If we
restrict our attention to $S=\left[a,b\right]$ and the intervals
contained in it we can define a $\sigma$-finite measure, obtaining
uniqueness of the extension. This is how we can deal with complicated
environments.

Once the measure is extended to the $\sigma$-algebra all the results
obtained above apply.

### Completion of a measure [Optional]

One small detail is left to be checked. Sometimes there is a set $B\subseteq S$
such that $B\subseteq A\in{\cal A}$ and $\mu\left(A\right)=0$, but
if $B\notin{\cal A}$ then its measure is undefined, while it should
be clearly zero. The completion of a $\sigma$-algebra to include
these type of 'harmless' sets is what follows. As before, including
sets or behaviors of measure zero is of no consequence.
!!! info "Definition: Completion of a $\sigma$-algebra"

    Let $\left(S,{\cal A},\mu\right)$
    be a measure space. Define a collection ${\cal C}$ as:
    \[
    {\cal C}=\left\{ C\subset S|\exists_{A\in{\cal A}}\mu\left(A\right)=0\quad\land\quad C\subset A\right\}
    \]
    The completion of $\sigma$-algebra ${\cal A}$ is:
    \[
    {\cal A}^{\prime}=\left\{ B^{\prime}\subseteq S\,|\,B^{\prime}=\left(A\cup C_{1}\right)\backslash C_{2}\qquad A\in{\cal A}\quad\land\quad C_{1},C_{2}\in{\cal C}\right\}
    \]
    By letting $C_{1}=C_{2}=\emptyset$ we get ${\cal A}\subseteq{\cal A}^{\prime}$,
    ${\cal A}^{\prime}$ includes all sets in $2^{S}$ that differ from a set
    in ${\cal A}$ by a set of measure $0$.

!!! info "Definition: Completion of a measure"

    Let $\left(S,{\cal A},\mu\right)$
    be a measure space and ${\cal A}^{\prime}$ the completion of ${\cal A}$.
    $\mu\left(B^{\prime}\right)=\mu\left(B\right)$ for any $B^{\prime}\in{\cal A}^{\prime}$
    that differs from $B\in{\cal A}$ by a set of measure $0$.

The Caratheodory and Hahn extension theorems also apply for completions.
